Lua 5.1 / 5.3 alignment and document (#3193)
nodemcu/nodemcu-firmware: docs/nodemcu-lrm.md

-  enabling relevant compatibility options for standard Lua libraries
-  regressing some Lua 5.3 API enhancements back into our Lua 5.1 implementation, and 
-  making some small changes to the module source to ensure that incompatible API use is avoided.

Further details are given in the [Lua compatibility](#lua-compatibility) section below.  Notwithstanding this, the Project has now deprecated Lua 5.1 and will soon be moving this version into frozen support.

As well as providing the ability to building runtime firmware environments for ESP chipsets, the Project also offers a `luac.cross` cross compiler that can be built for common platforms such as Windows 10 and Linux, and this enables developers to compile source modules into a binary file format for download to ESP targets and loading from those targets.
 
## Basic Concepts

The NodeNCU runtime offers a full implementation of the [LRM §2](https://www.lua.org/manual/5.3/manual.html#2) core concepts, with the following adjustments:

### Values and Types

> -  The firmware is compiled to use 32-bit integers and single-precision (32-bit) floats.  Address pointers are also 32-bit, and this allows all Lua variables to be encoded in RAM as an 8-byte "`TValue`" (compared to the 12-byte `Tvalue` used in Lua 5.1

Author: Yup, but this is downstream -- for now.

### Additional API Functions and Types

These are available for developers coding new library modules in C.  Note that if you compare the standard and NodeMCU versions of `lua.h` you will find a small number of entries not listed below.  This is because the Lua 5.1 and Lua 5.3 variants are incompatible owing to architectural differences.  However, `laubxlib.h` includes equivalent wrapper version-compatible functions that may be used safely for both versions.

#### ROTable and ROTable_entry

Extra structure types used in `LROT` macros to declare static RO tables.  See detailed section below.

#### lua_createrotable

` void (lua_createrotable) (lua_State *L, ROTable *t, const ROTable_entry *e, ROTable *mt);`         [-0, +1, -]

Create a RAM based `ROTable` pointing to the `ROTable_entry` vector `e`, and metatable `mt`.

#### lua_debugbreak and ASSERT

`  void (lua_debugbreak)(void);`

> `lua_debugbreak()` and `ASSERT(condtion)` are available for for development debugging.  If `DEVELOPMENT_USE_GDB` is defined then these will trigger a debugger break and evaluate a conditional assert prologue on the same.  If not, then these are effectively ignored and generate no executable code.

Reviewer: "condtion" -> "condition"

#### lua_dump

` int lua_dump (lua_State *L, lua_Writer writer, void *data, int strip);`         [-0, +0, –]

Dumps function at the top of the stack function as a binary chunk as per LRM.  However the last argument is now an integer is in the range -1..2, rather a boolean as per standard Lua:
- `strip`

>     - -1, use the current default strip level (which can be set by [`lua_striptdebug`](#lua_striptdebug))

Reviewer: "lua_striptdebug" -> "lua_stripdebug"?

    - 0, keep all debug info
    - 1, discard Local and Upvalue debug info; keep line number info
    - 2, discard Local, Upvalue and line number debug info

The internal NodeMCU `Proto` encoding of debug line number information is typically 15× more compact than in standard Lua; the intermediate `strip=1` argument allows the removal of must of the debug information whilst retaining the ability to produce a proper line number traceback on error. 

#### lua_freeheap

` int (lua_freeheap) (void);`         [-0, +0, –]

> returns the amount of free heap available to the Lua memory allocator.

Reviewer: Maybe make a note that this doesn't take into account fragmentation of said available memory? I.e. the max allocatable chunk may be significantly smaller.

Author: Agreed, but its the best we have ATM.  This is also a very cheap call since this value is held as a `size_t` in DRAM0, so this is just a getter for this.

### The Debug Interface

#### lua_getstrings

`  int lua_getstrings (lua_State *L, int opt);`         [-0, +1, m]

If the ROM string table is selected and no LFS is present then `nil` is pushed onto the stack.  Otherwise the specified string table is scanned to build a list of strings in it. The resulting table is pushed onto the stack.
-  `opt` evaluated as a boolean; if `true` then the ROM string table is listed, else the RAM string table
-  returns the number of strings in returned table.

### Auxiliary Library Functions and Types 

Note that the LRM defines an auxiliary library which contains a set of functions that assist in coding convenience and economy.  These are strictly built on top of the basic API, and are defined in `lauxlib.h`.  By convention all auxiliary functions have the prefix `luaL_` so module code should only contain `lua_XXXX()` and `luaL_XXXX()` data declarations and functions.  And since the `lauxlib.h` itself incudes `lua.h`, all C modules should only need to `#include "lauxlib.h"` in their include preambles.

NodeMCU adds some extra auxiliary functions above those defined in the LRM.

#### luaL_lfsreload

> `  int  lua_lfsreload (lua_State *L);`         [-1, +1, -]

Reviewer: Didn't the return type get changed to `void` above?

Author: At the moment it restarts (and so never returns on a successful load, but it returns an error string (e.g. file does not exist) on error.  Personally I'd prefer it to be a `void`and to throw errors, but returning the error was the consensus when we had the discussion back when.

Reviewer: Yes, but as part of this PR it does change to a `void`. See line 202 in `lflash.c` and 290 in `lauxlib.h`.

Returns the type of the pushed value.

#### luaL_pushlfsdts

`  int luaL_pushlfsdts (lua_State *L);`         [-0, +1, m-]

If LFS is loaded then the Unix-style date-timestamp for the compile time of the image is pushed onto the stack as a integer value, otherwise `nil` is pushed.  Note that the primary use of this stamp is to act as a unique identifier for the image version.

Returns the type of the pushed value.

#### luaL_reref
`  void (luaL_reref) (lua_State *L, int t, int *ref);`         [-1, +0, m]

Variant of [luaL_ref](https://www.lua.org/manual/5.3/manual.html#luaL_ref).  If `*ref` is a valid reference in the table at index t, then this is replaced by the object at the top of the stack (and pops the object), otherwise it creates and returns a new reference using the `luaL_ref` algorithm.

#### luaL_rometatable

`  int (luaL_rometatable) (lua_State *L, const char* tname, const ROTable *p);`         [-0, +1, e]

Equivalent to `luaL_newmetatable()` for ROTable metatables.  Adds key / ROTable entry to the registry  `[tname] = p`, rather than using a new RAM table.

#### luaL_unref2

`  luaL_unref2(l,t,r)`

> This macro executes `luaL_unref(L, t, r)` and then assigns `r = LUA_NOREF`.

Reviewer: Handy. Can I assume it's got a `do { luaL_unref(L, t, r); r = LUA_NOREF; } while (0)` safe-guard so it's safe to use as
```
if (something)
  luaL_unref2(L, t, r);
```
?

Author: First confession time: no I missed this so 15-all on the C syntax competition.  So **fixed** this.

I did a quick grep-fest of the headers and also came up with:
-  4 cases of trailing `;` which shouldn't be there. **Fixed**.
-  only one `do { } while(0)` use.  My macro (because single prec fmod is missing form the xtensa lib):
```C
#define luai_nummod(L,a,b,m) do { \
  if (b==0) luaG_runerror(L,"modulo by zero"); \
  (m) = (a) - floor((a)/(b))*(b); \
  if ((m)*(b) < 0) (m) += (b); \
} while (0)
```
-  2 else stealers
-  8 bare `{ }` constructs, such as `#define lua_tmpnam(b,e)	{ e = (tmpnam(b) == NULL); }` 

The Lua headers just use the bare brace constructs and avoid the  `do { } while(0)` even though they aren't syntactically identical.  I don't think that I need to change bare brace constructs in the private headers.

### Declaring modules and ROTables in NodeMCU

All NodeMCU C library modules should include the standard header "`module.h`".  This internally includes `lnodemcu.h` and these together provide the macros to enable declaration of NodeMCU modules and ROTables within them.  All ROtable support macros are wither prefixed by `LRO_` (Lua Read Only) or in the case of table entries `LROT_`. 

#### NODEMCU_MODULE

` NODEMCU_MODULE(sectionname, libraryname, map, initfunc)`

> This macro enables the module to be statically declared and linked in the `ROM` ROTable.  The global environment's metafield `__index=ROM` hence any entries in the ROM table are resolved as read-only entries in the global environment.

Reviewer: "metafield" -> "metafield is set as" or some such? It took me a couple of reads to grok the meaning of the sentence as is.

> -  `sectionname`. This is the linker section for the module and by convention this is the uppercased library name (e.g. `FILE`).  Behind the scenes `_module_selected` is appended to this section name if corresponding "use module" macro (e.g. `LUA_USE_MODULES_FILE`) is defined in the configuration.  Only the modules sections `*_module_selected` are linked into the firmware image ad those not selected are ignored.

Reviewer: "ad" -> "and"

>  -  `libraryname`.  This is the name of the module (e.g. `FILE`) and is the key for the entry in the `ROM` ROTable.

Reviewer: "FILE" -> "file"

-  `map`.  This is the ROTable defining the functions and constants for the module, and this is the corresponding value for the entry in the `ROM` ROTable.
-  `initfunc`.  If this is not NULL, it should be a valid C function and is call during Lua initialisation to carry out one-time initialisation of the module.

#### LROT_BEGIN and LROT_END

`  LROT_BEGIN(rt,mt,flags)`
`  LROT_END(rt,mt,flags)`
These macros start and end a ROTable definition.  The three parameters must be the same in both declarations.
-  `rt`.  ROTable name.
-  `mt`.  ROTable's metatable.  This should be of the form `LROT_TABLEREF(tablename)` if the metatable is used and `NULL` otherwise.

> -  `flags`. The Lua VM table access routines use a `flags` field to short-circuit where the access needs to honour metamethods during access.  In the case of a static ROTable this flag bit mask must be declared statically during compile rather than cached dynamically at runtime.  Hence if the table is a metatable and it includes the metamethods `__index`, `__newindex`, `__gc`, `__mode`, `__len` or `__eq`, then the mask field should or-in the corresponding mask for example if `__index` is used then the flags should include `LROT_MASK_INDEX`.  Note than index and GC are a very common combination, so `LROT_MASK_GC_INDEX` is also defined to be `(LROT_MASK_GC | LROT_MASK_INDEX)`.

Reviewer: "note than" -> "note that"

Note that ROTable entries can be declared in any order except that keys starting with "`_`" must be declared at the head of the list.  This is a pragmatic constraint for runtime efficiency.  A lookaside cache is used to optimise key searches and results in a direct table probe in over 95% of ROTable accesses.  A table miss (that is the key doesn't exist) still requires a full scan of the list, and the main source of table misses are scans for metafield values.  Forcing these to be at the head of the ROTable allows the scan to abort on reading the first non-"`_`" key.

ROTables can still support other key and value types by using an index metamethod to point at an C index access function.  For example this technique is used in the `utf8` library to return `utf8.charpattern`

```C
LROT_BEGIN(utf8_meta, NULL, LROT_MASK_INDEX)
  LROT_FUNCENTRY( __index, utf8_lookup )
LROT_END(utf8_meta, NULL, LROT_MASK_INDEX)

> LROT_BEGIN(utf8, NULL, 0)

Reviewer: @HHHartmann you mean here, to match the `LROT_END()` below, right?

Author: Bugger, you've caught me out.  They should match _by convention_ which isn't enforced, though if parameter 1 doesn't match we get a compile error.  Parameter 2 is only used in the END declaration.  Even so, I've updated both the doc and the the live C code.  Thanks

-  The modulus operator is implemented for string data types so `str % var` is a synonym for `string.format(str, var)` and `str % tbl` is a synonym for `string.format(str, table.unpack(tbl))`.  This python-like formatting functionality is a very common extension to the string library, but is awkward to implement with `string` being a `ROTable`.
-  The `string.dump()` `strip` parameter can take integer values 1,2,3 (the [`lua_stripdebug`](#lua_stripdebug) strip parameter + 1).  `false` is synonymous to `1`, `true` to `3` and omitted takes the default strip level.
-  The `string` library does not offer locale support. 
-  The 5.3 `math` library is expanded compared to the 5.1 one, and specifically:
    - Included: ` abs`, ` acos`, ` asin`, ` atan`, ` ceil`, ` cos`, ` deg`, ` exp`, ` tointeger`, ` floor`, ` fmod`, ` ult`, ` log`, ` max`, ` min`, ` modf`, ` rad`, ` random`, ` randomseed`, ` sin`, ` sqrt`, ` tan` and ` type`
    -  Not implemented: ` atan2`, ` cosh`, ` sinh`, ` tanh`, ` pow`, ` frexp`, ` ldexp` and ` log10`

>  -  Input, output OS Facilities (the `io` and `os` libraries) are implement for firmware builds because of the minimal OS supported offered by the embedded run-time.  The separately documented `file` and `node` libraries provide functionally similar analogues.  The host execution environment implemented by `luac.cross` does support the `io` and `os` libraries.

Reviewer: "are implement" -> "are not implemented"

Author: Correct, though in hindsight why we didn't us `io` instead of `file` seems a bad decision.

> -  The full `debug` library is implemented less the `debug.debug()` function.  `debug.getstrings(type)`where type is one of `'ROM'`, or `'RAM'` (the default) returns a sorted array of the strings returned from the [`lua_getstrings`](#lua_getstrings) function.

Reviewer: Spacing around `debug.getstrings(type)` seems wonky? Should this be on a new line altogether perhaps?

Author: -  Now a separate indented bullet
    -   An extra function `debug.getstrings(type)` has been added; `type` is one of `'ROM'`, or `'RAM'` (the default). Returns a sorted array of the strings returned from the [`lua_getstrings`](#lua_getstrings) function.

-  For a limited number of features the Project accepts that the two versions APIs are incompatible and hence modules should either avoid their use or use `#if LUA_VERSION_NUM == 501` conditional compilation.

The following subsections detail how NodeMCU Lua versions deviate from standard Lua in order to achieve these objectives.

### Enabling Compatibility modes

The following Compatibility modes are enabled:
-  `LUA_COMPAT_APIINTCASTS`.  These `ìnt`cast are still used within NodeMCU modules.
-  `LUA_COMPAT_UNPACK`.  This retains `ROM.unpack` as a global synonym for `table.unpack` 
-  `LUA_COMPAT_LOADERS`.  This keeps `package.loaders` as a synonym for `package.seachers`
-  `LUA_COMPAT_LOADSTRING`.  This keeps `loadstring(s)` as a synonym for `load(s)`.

### New Lua 5.3 features back-ported into the Lua 5.1 API

-  Table access routines in Lua 5.3 are now type `int` rather than `void` and return the type of the value pushed onto the stack.  The 5.1 routines `lua_getfield`, `lua_getglobal`, `lua_geti`, `lua_gettable`, `lua_rawget`, `lua_rawgeti`, `lua_rawgetp` and `luaL_getmetatable` have been updated to mirror this behaviour and return the type of the value pushed onto the stack.

> -  There is a general numeric comparison API function `lua_compare()` with macros for `lua_equal()` and `lua_lessthan()` whereas 5.1 only support the `==` and `<` tests through separate API calls.  5.1 has been update to mirror the 5.3. implementation.

Reviewer: "update" -> "updated"

> -  Lua 5.3 includes a `lua_absindex(L, idx)` which converts ToS relative (e.g. `-1`) indices to stack base relative and hence independent of further push/pop operations.  This makes using down-stack indexes a lot simpler. 5.1 has been update to mirror this 5.3 function.

Reviewer: "update" -> "updated" (deja vu)

# NodeMCU Lua Reference

## Introduction

NodeMCU firmware is an IoT project ("the Project") which implements a Lua-based runtime for SoC modules based on the Espressif ESP8266 and ESP32 architectures.  This reference specifically addresses how the NodeMCU Lua implementation relates to standard Lua as described in the two versions of the Lua language that we currently support:

-  The [Lua 5.1 Reference Manual]( https://www.lua.org/manual/5.1/) and
-  The [Lua 5.3 Reference Manual]( https://www.lua.org/manual/5.3/) (**LRM**)

Developers using the NodeMCU environment should familiarise themselves with the 5.3 LRM.

> The Project provides a wide range of standard library modules written in both C and Lua to support many ESP hardware modules and chips, and these are documented in separation sections in our [online documentation](https://nodemcu.readthedocs.io/).

Reviewer 2: "in separate sections", not "separation"

This reference supplements LRM content and module documentation by focusing on the differences between NodeMCU Lua and standard Lua 5.3 in use.

> One of our goals in introducing Lua 5.3 support was to maintain the continuity of our existing C modules by ensuring that they can be successfully compiled and executed in both the Lua 5.1 and 5.3 environments.  This goal was achieved by combination of:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One of our goals in introducing Lua 5.3 support was to maintain the continuity of our existing C modules by ensuring that they can be successfully compiled and executed in both the Lua 5.1 and 5.3 environments.  This goal was achieved by a combination of:
```

-  enabling relevant compatibility options for standard Lua libraries;

> -  regressing some Lua 5.3 API enhancements back into our Lua 5.1 implementation, and 

Reviewer 2: Maybe "back-porting" instead of "regressing"?

-  making some small changes to the module source to ensure that incompatible API use is avoided.

> Further details are given in the [Lua compatibility](#lua-compatibility) section below.  Notwithstanding this, the Project has now deprecated Lua 5.1 and will soon be moving this version into frozen support.

Reviewer 3: > moving this version into frozen support

Do we have consensus on that yet? I for one would be happy to remove once it's been deprecated for 2-3 release cycles.

Author: > Do we have consensus on that yet?

I feel that the committers actively involved in this process (you, me, Nathaniel, Gregor and perhaps Philip) would like to see this sooner rather than later.  Like you, I feel that it will probably take a couple of release cycles to sort out residual gremlins and round out both the documentation and NodeMCU extras.  One side effect of going for minimal change to the Lua53 core + aligning the 5.1 and 5.3 APIs over this last year is that a lot of the nasty bits of the `eLua` implementation have been removed without loss of functionality.  

No doubt they could be with some further polishing, but with these two new reference documents we at least have a formal specification of NodeMCU Lua is and advice to new C module developers can now sensibly boil down to (i) read and understand the reference manuals and (ii) start with the Lua and modules libraries for examples.

Somewhere along this process we are going to have to grasp the nettle of merging all of these enhancement into (and integrating) the ESP32 codebase, but to be honest I would be a lot more comfortable starting this if I had committed support from one of the more ESP32-aware committers.

Author: > I'm trying to schedule some work time to spend on the next step(s) on the 8266 & 32 branch merging work.

Fantastic.  I suspect that this effort is going to be resourced by the usual suspects: You, me, Nathaniel and Gregor, with Marcel doing his usual sanity check oversight.  

There are some fundamental architectural enhancements that I want to add to Lua 5.3 (such as on ESP building of LFS images, and dual LFS images) that I feel that we should deploy on the ESP8266 platform soon and get stable before we do the actual branch merge.  (See this [\#3128 comment](3128#issuecomment-638452596) and following for discussion about the advantages of a dual LFS.)

Even so (so long I can continue to dodgy this Covid bullet),  we should plan to do this within the next few months.

As well as providing the ability to building runtime firmware environments for ESP chipsets, the Project also offers a `luac.cross` cross compiler that can be built for common platforms such as Windows 10 and Linux, and this enables developers to compile source modules into a binary file format for download to ESP targets and loading from those targets.
 
## Basic Concepts

The NodeNCU runtime offers a full implementation of the [LRM §2](https://www.lua.org/manual/5.3/manual.html#2) core concepts, with the following adjustments:

### Values and Types

> -  The firmware is compiled to use 32-bit integers and single-precision (32-bit) floats.  Address pointers are also 32-bit, and this allows all Lua variables to be encoded in RAM as an 8-byte "`TValue`" (compared to the 12-byte `Tvalue` used in Lua 5.1

Reviewer 2: Missing close-paren?

> -  C modules can statically declare read-only tables known as a "`ROTable`".  There are some limitations to the types for ROTable keys and value, in order to ensure that these are consistent with static declaration.  ROTables are stored in code space (in flash memory on the ESPs), and hence do not take up RAM resources.  However these are still represented by the Lua type _table_ and a Lua application can treat them during execution the same as any other read-only table.  Any attempt to write to a `ROTable` or to set its metatable will throw an error.

Reviewer 2: Number mismatch in "tables known as a"; perhaps `tables, known as "ROTable"-s`?

Author: I've used:

C modules can statically declare read-only variant of the `Table` structure type known as a "`ROTable`".

-  NodeMCU also introduces a concept known as **Lua Flash Store (LFS)**.  This enables Lua code (and any string constants used in this code) to be compiled and stored in code space, and hence without using RAM resources.  Such LFS functions are still represented by the type _function_ and can be executed just like any other Lua function.

### Environments and the Global Environment

These are implemented as per the LRM.  Note that the Lua 5.1 and Lua 5.3 language implementations are different and can introduce breaking incompatibilities when moving between versions, but this is a Lua issue rather than a NodeMCU one.

### Garbage Collection

All LFS functions, any string constants used in these functions, and any ROTables are stored in static code space.  These are ignored by the Lua Garbage collector (LGC).  The LGC only scans RAM-based resources and recovers unused ones.  The NodeMCU LGC has slightly modified configuration settings that increase its aggressiveness as heap usage approaches RAM capacity.

### Coroutines

> The firmware includes a full coroutine implementation, but note that there are some slight differences between the standard Lua 5.1 and Lua 5.3 implementations.

Reviewer 2: Forward-ref the discussion of differences?

The NodeMCU runtime implements a non-blocking threaded model that is similar to that of `node.js`, and hence most Lua execution is initiated from event-triggered callback (CB) routines within C library modules.  NodeMCU enables full recovery of error diagnostics from otherwise unprotected Lua execution by adding an additional auxiliary library function [`luaL_pcallx`](#luaL_pcallx).  All event-driven Lua callbacks within our library modules use `luaL_pcallx` instead of `lua_call`.  This has the same behaviour if no uncaught error occurs.  However, in the case of an error that would have previously resulted in a panic, a new SDK task is posted with the error traceback as an upvalue to process this error information.  

> The default action is to  print a full traceback and then trigger processor restart, that is a similar outcome as before but with recovery of the full error traceback.  However the `node.onerror()` library function is available to override this default action; for example developers might wish to print the error without restarting the processor, so that the circumstances which triggered the error can be investigated.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to tell our users to restart in the `onerror` CB in production environments?

if `conf` is not `NULL`, then this returns an int[5] summary of the LFS configuration.  The first 3 items are the mapped and flash address of the LFS region, and its allocated size.  If the LFS is loaded then the 4th is the current size used and the 5th (for Lua 5.3 only) the date-timestamp of loaded LFS image. 

#### lua_getstate

`  lua_State * lua_getstate();`         [-0, +0, -]

returns the main thread `lua_State` record.  Used in CBs to initialise `L` for subsequent API call use.

#### lua_pushrotable
`  void lua_pushrotable (lua_State *L, ROTable *p);`         [-0, +1, -]

Pushes a ROTable onto the stack.

#### lua_pushstringsarray
`  int lua_pushstringsarray (lua_State *L, int opt);`         [-0, +1, m]

Pushes an array onto the stack containing all strings in the specified strings table. If `opt` = 0 then the RAM table is used, else if `opt` = 1 and LFS is loaded then the LFS  table is used, else `nil` is pushed onto the stack.

Returns a status boolean 1 = table pushed. 

#### lua_stripdebug
`  int lua_stripdebug (lua_State *L, int level);`         [-1, +0, e]

This function has two modes.  A value is popped off the stack.  

> -  If this value is `nil`, then the default strip level is set to this if `level` in the range 0 to 2, otherwise the current default level is returned.

Reviewer 4: The current default level is always returned
```suggestion
-  If this value is `nil`, then the default strip level is set to this if `level` in the range 0 to 2. Returns the current default level.
```

Author: Agreed.  Also added the following to the next point `Returns an _approximate_ estimate of the heap freed (this can be a lot higher if some strings can be garbage collected).`  In practice because of heap management overheads etc. and GC of strings this estimate can be 2-3× too small.  IMO, better to get the heap size before and after or just avoid the allocation in the first place by setting the default level beforehand.

#### LROT_xxxx_ENTRY

ROTables only support static declaration of string keys and value types: C function, Lightweight userdata, Numeric, ROTable.  These are entries are declared by means of the  `LROT_FUNCENTRY`, `LROT_LUDENTRY`, `LROT_NUMENTRY`, `LROT_INTENTRY`, `LROT_FLOATENTRY` and `LROT_TABENTRY` macros.  All take two parameters: the name of the key and the value. For Lua 5.1 builds `LROT_NUMENTRY` and `LROT_INTENTRY` both generate a numeric `TValue`, but in the case of Lua 5.3 these are separate numeric subtypes so these macros generate the appropriate subtype.

> Note that ROTable entries can be declared in any order except that keys starting with "`_`" must be declared at the head of the list.  This is a pragmatic constraint for runtime efficiency.  A lookaside cache is used to optimise key searches and results in a direct table probe in over 95% of ROTable accesses.  A table miss (that is the key doesn't exist) still requires a full scan of the list, and the main source of table misses are scans for metafield values.  Forcing these to be at the head of the ROTable allows the scan to abort on reading the first non-"`_`" key.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we should end up sorting them alphabetically, in some eventuality.  Not pertinent to this PR.

Reviewer 4: I also thought about this. Do we know the length of the array? Then we could do binary search.

Author: I did try this when I was first playing with different implementation strategies and benchmarked a binary chop search.  It made very little difference largely because of the effectiveness of the LRU cache and so this applies to LRU misses only.

At the moment the code does a linear scan using an inline (masked) word comparison of the first char[4] of the key and then only does a strcmp as a final check.  With a binary chop you need to so a strcmp on _every_ comparison so the binary chop only starts to win out when the table have more than 16 entries or so.  Most modules don't have large ROTables.

The time that must do a full table scan is in the case of a key miss and in practice the vast majority of these are metamethod probes which is why the keys starting with "`_`" _must_ be at the start of the table.  Doing a ROTable access used to be maybe 50× slower than a RAM Table access. Now it is something like 30% slower.  Small enough not to bother with further optimisation, IMO.

ROTables can still support other key and value types by using an index metamethod to point at an C index access function.  For example this technique is used in the `utf8` library to return `utf8.charpattern`

```C

> LROT_BEGIN(utf8_meta, NULL, LROT_MASK_INDEX)

Author: It works.  Try it! :smile: I have added the extra explanatory para below the C inclusion:

Any reference to `utf8.charpattern` will call the `__index` method function (`utf8_lookup()`); this returns the UTF8 character pattern if the name equals `"charpattern"` and `nil` otherwise.  Hence `utf8` works as standard even though ROTables don't natively support a string value type.

  LROT_FUNCENTRY( __index, utf8_lookup )
LROT_END(utf8_meta, NULL, LROT_MASK_INDEX)

LROT_BEGIN(utf8, NULL, 0)
  LROT_FUNCENTRY( offset, byteoffset )
  LROT_FUNCENTRY( codepoint, codepoint )
  LROT_FUNCENTRY( char, utfchar )
  LROT_FUNCENTRY( len, utflen )
  LROT_FUNCENTRY( codes, iter_codes )
LROT_END(utf8, LROT_TABLEREF(utf8_meta), 0)
```

### Standard Libraries

-  Basic Lua functions, coroutine support, Lua module support, string and table manipulation are as per the standard Lua implementation.  However, note that there are some breaking changes in the standard Lua string implementation as discussed in the LRM, e.g. the `\z` end-of-line separator; no string functions exhibit a CString behaviour (that is treat `"\0"` as a special character).

> -  The modulus operator is implemented for string data types so `str % var` is a synonym for `string.format(str, var)` and `str % tbl` is a synonym for `string.format(str, table.unpack(tbl))`.  This python-like formatting functionality is a very common extension to the string library, but is awkward to implement with `string` being a `ROTable`.

Author: Ah, there are a couple of long standing bugs in standard Lua 5.1 relating to internal functions that assume that Lua strings are CStrings
-  `print()` treats any string as a CString and hence truncates any printed field at `'\0'`. (See #2363)
-  The search functions treat patterns as CStrings and will terminate the pattern at `'\0'`.  This was "fixed" by a workaround of having a `%z` character class.  IIRC, this caused a bug in one of the HTTP modules.

Both of these were fixed in Lua 5.2 and in Lua 5.3  `%z` is no longer treated as a character class.
